---
title: E303 USB Modem
nav_sort: 4
autotoc: true
layout: guide.hbs
---

### Introduction

The Huawei E303 USB modem is an extraordinary cellular
modem for development and testing work. You can buy the E303 from
[our online store](/store).

The E303 supports two modes: in the default HiLink Mode, the device acts as a standard
ethernet network interface, and you can configure the basic modem options through a web UI. 
In serial mode, the device exposes a low-level serial interface which allows
for more control over the behavior of the modem. 

### HiLink Mode (Windows and MacOS)

1. Slide the cover off of the Huawei E303 Modem and insert your Hologram SIM card 
   with the full-size SIM insert.
   {{{ image src="/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/e303withsim.jpg" 
      alt="e303 with SIM inserted" }}}
2. Plug the modem into your computer. The modem will mount itself as a storage 
   device with the appropriate drivers on it. Install the drivers from 
   the device, or download and install the latest drivers from the *Downloads*
   section of the [E303 product
   page](http://m.huawei.com/enmobile/consumer/mobile-broadband/dongles/detail/e303-en.htm).
3. When the install is finished, a web browser should automatically open to
   the Huawei HiLink settings page. If this doesn’t happen, navigate to 
   [192.168.1.1](http://192.168.1.1).
4. Click Settings->Profile Management->New and add a profile for the Hologram
   APN (`hologram`) as shown here:
   {{{ image src="/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/set-apn.png" }}}
5. Save all that and then go to the Connection Settings page. Enable all of the 
   auto connect options as shown here:
   {{{ image src="/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/autorecon.png" }}}
6. Finally click back to the Home page and click the connect button. You 
   should now be connected to the internet via cellular.

### HiLink Mode (Linux)

{{#callout}}
These steps assume a graphical interface so you can configure the modem via
a web UI. If you are working with an embedded Linux device with only a command
line interface, you can set up the profile on another computer, then plug the modem into
the embedded device.
{{/callout}}

1. Install the *usb-modeswitch* utility, which will handle switching the modem
   from storage mode to modem mode. For Debian-based distributions (e.g. Ubuntu
   and Raspbian), this package
   can be installed from the standard repositories with:
   ```bash
   sudo apt-get update
   sudo apt-get install usb-modeswitch
   ```
   Then reboot your PC.
2. Slide the cover off of the Huawei E303 Modem and insert your Hologram SIM card
   with the full-size SIM insert.
   {{{ image src="/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/e303withsim.jpg" 
       alt="e303 with SIM inserted" }}}
   Then plug the modem into a USB port on your PC.
3. Run `ifconfig` to find the `eth*` device corresponding to the modem. If you
   are unsure which `eth` device is the right one, you can unplug the modem and
   see which one disappears when running `ifconfig` again.
   {{{ image src="http://hologram.io/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/1-ifconfig.png"
       alt="ifconfig screenshot" }}}
4. If the network interface doesn't have an IP address assigned (no *inet addr* entry in
   `ifconfig`), run the DHCP client to acquire an address:
   ```
   sudo dhclient eth1
   ```
   Where `eth1` should be replaced with the modem's device name.
5. Open a web browser to [192.168.1.1](http://192.168.1.1) to configure the modem via web
   UI. Set up the Hologram APN profile and connection settings as described in
   the Windows/Mac instructions above, then click the *Connect* button on the
   device home page.
6. Disable or unplug your PC's other network connections (ethernet or wireless),
   then test your internet connection:
   ```bash
   ping -c1 hologram.io
   ```
7. If you get an error, you may need to add a route configuration so that
   network traffic is routed to the new cellular interface. From the command
   line, enter:
   ```bash
   sudo route add default gw 192.168.1.1 eth1
   ```
   Where `eth1` should be replaced with the modem's device name.
   Then retry the `ping`.

To automatically enable the modem whenever it's plugged in and across restarts,
you'll need to modify the networking config. In Debian-based distributions,
add the following lines at the end of the file
`/etc/network/interfaces`:

```bash
allow-hotplug eth1
iface eth1 inet dhcp
```
Where `eth1` should be replaced with the modem's device name.


### Serial PPP Mode (Linux)

This mode is a little more complicated to set up, but it allows for inbound
connections. That means you can SSH into your device using our [Spacebridge
service](/docs/guide/cloud/spacebridge-tunnel).

1. Install some required software packages. On Debian-based distributions:
   ```bash
   sudo apt-get update
   sudo apt-get install ppp usb-modeswitch screen
   ```
2. Disable automatic USB mode switching
   so that the E303 doesn't switch into HiLink mode.
   Edit the file `/etc/usb_modeswitch.conf` and change the
   line that says `DisableSwitching=0` to `DisableSwitching=1`. Here's
   what the correct configuration looks like when editing with the *nano*
   editor:

   {{{ image src="/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/modeswitch-usb-config.png" }}}

   Save the file and reboot your system.
3. Slide the cover off of the Huawei E303 Modem and insert your Hologram SIM card 
   with the full-size SIM insert.
   Then plug the modem into a USB port on your PC.
4. On the command line, list your connected USB devices with `lsusb`. In the 
   output you should see a line for the modem:
   ```bash
   Bus 001 Device 006: ID 12d1:1f01 Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
   ```
5. The ID ending with `1f01` indicates that the modem is in storage mode. Switch it into PPP
   modem mode by running the command:
   ```bash
   sudo usb_modeswitch -v 0x12d1 -p 0x1f01 -V 0x12d1 -P 0x1001 -M "55534243000000000000000000000611060000000000000000000000000000"
   ```
6. Run `lsusb` again, and you should see that the modem's device ID and
   description has changed:
   ```bash
   Bus 001 Device 008: ID 12d1:1001 Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. E169/E620/E800 HSDPA Modem
   ```
7. Get the hologram-tools files which includes the PPP configuration
   files:
   ```bash
   wget https://github.com/hologram-io/hologram-tools/archive/master.zip
   unzip master.zip
   ```
8. Copy the PPP configuration files to the correct locations:
   ```bash
   cd hologram-tools-master
   sudo cp ppp/chatscripts/e303 /etc/chatscripts
   sudo cp ppp/peers/e303 /etc/ppp/peers
   ```
9.  Stop any wifi or ethernet interfaces so that traffic we don't have to worry about things being routed
    over the wrong interface: `sudo ifconfig wlan0 down`
10. Start the *ppp* daemon for the modem:
    ```bash
    sudo pon e303
    ```
    You should see the modem's LED turn on. List your network interfaces with
    `ifconfig` and verify that you see a *ppp0* entry.
11. You are now connected to the internet via cellular. To stop the
    connection: `sudo poff e303`

#### Opening the Serial Console for AT Commands

AT commands are a somewhat standardized set of commands for communicating with
modems. When the E303 is connected in serial mode, you can send *AT* commands 
via a serial console which can access features and information not available 
in HiLink mode.

Make sure the modem's PPP network interface is disabled, then
use the *screen* command to open a serial connection to
the device:
```bash
sudo poff e303
screen /dev/ttyUSB0
```
Type `ATI` and hit enter to send that command to the modem. You should see a 
response from the modem containing some device information. From this console
you can send any AT command that the E303 supports. 

To disconnect and exit *screen*, type *Ctrl+A* followed by *k*. Then type *y* 
at the prompt to confirm.


#### Sending an SMS With AT Commands

To send an SMS via the AT command console:

1. Send `AT`
2. Switch into text SMS mode by sending `AT+CMGF=1`
3. Prepare the message by sending `AT+CMGW="+<phone number>"` The phone number 
   must include the country code so to send an SMS to the US number 773-555-1234,
   you would send the command `AT+CMGW="+17735551234"`. If it worked, you 
   should get a `>` prompt.
4. Type in your message at the prompt and hit *Ctrl+Z* to end the message.
5. After you hit Ctrl+Z you should get a message back in the format *+CMGW: X* 
   where X is a number. This number is needed in the next step.
6. Send `AT+CMSS=X` where X was the number from the previous step.
   If all goes well you should get a *+CMSS* response followed by an *OK*. 
   Your SMS has been sent!

Here is a console showing a complete SMS transaction:

{{{ image src="/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/sms.png" }}}

#### Other Useful AT Commands

* `AT^U2DIAG=0` will cause the modem to enter serial modem mode whenever it's
  powered on.
* `AT^U2DIAG=375` reverts to the default of entering HiLink mode on poweron.
* `AT+CFUN=7` turns off the radio
* `AT+CFUN=1` turns on the radio

### Additional Resources

* [This forum
  post](http://mybroadband.co.za/vb/showthread.php/507680-Huawei-HiLink-modems-%28E303-E3131-etc-%29?p=10250878&viewfull=1#post10250878)
  describes setting up serial mode and sending AT commands on Windows
* [Arch Linux wiki
  page](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Huawei_E1550_3G_modem) for a 
  similar Huawei modem, including AT commands
* [Receiving SMS messages using AT
  commands](http://www.smssolutions.net/tutorials/gsm/receivesmsat/)

